Ch 3 (#490)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/3-measurement.tex

	both across the team and across time.
	This section also discusses what specific research data you need 
	based on your project's research design,
	and how those data needs are documented in the data plan.
	
	The second section of this chapter covers two activities where 
	research data is created by the research team 
	instead of being observed in the real world.
	Those two activities are random sampling and random assignment.
	Special focus is spent on how to ensure that 
	these and other random processes are reproducible,
	which is critical for the credibility of your research.
	
	The chapter concludes with a discussion of power calculations and randomization inference,
	and how both are important tools to make optimal choices when planning data work.
	
	
\end{fullwidth}

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\section{Translating research design to a data plan}

These could be data from multiple survey rounds,
data acquired from different partners (such as administrative data, implementation data, sensor data),
web scraping, 
or complex combinations of these and other sources. 

> Most projects require data source to answer all their research questions.

Author: @luizaandrade what happened here, this paragraph is now weird

\begin{fullwidth}

> In this chapter we will show how you can save a lot of time

Reviewer: never mind, i see this is now referenced at the start of section 2, that seems fine

and increase the quality of your research by 
planning your project's data requirements in advance.
Planning data requirements should be more than
just a listing of the key outcome variables. 
It requires understanding how to structure the project's data
to best answer the research questions, 
and creating the tools to share this understanding across your team.

> 

Author: done in 40875f5d9606bee420c91f583c52d33b0a19279c

and analyze the relationships between the units that appear in them
to answer all your research questions.
You might think that you are able to keep all the relevant details in your head,
but your whole research team is unlikely to have the same understanding,
at all times, of all the datasets required.
The only way to make sure that the full team shares the same understanding
is to create a \textbf{data plan}\index{Data plan}.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Plan}}
DIME's data plan template has three components; 
one \textit{data linkage table},\index{Data linkage table}
one or several \textit{master datasets}\index{Master datasets}
and one or several \textit{data flow charts}.\index{Data flowchart} 

A \textbf{data linkage table}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Linkage\_Table}}
lists all the datasets that will be used in the project.
Its most important function is to indicate 
how all those datasets can be be linked when
combining information from multiple data sources.
\textbf{Master datasets}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}

> list all observations your project ever encounter

Author: I disagree. In cases where we encounter more units that those in the sampling frame, we should still include them. Lets say we have a list of farmers from the government that are the units that are eligible to be listed. i.e. our sampling frame. Examples on farmers not in the sampling frame that we should still add are:
* Other farmers that are listed in a monitoring activity if the intervention was, for example, a training.
* Other farmers listing in a social network module.
If we ever were to do a fuzzy match we will do less errors the more data we have, so we should add everyone, also those never eligible to be sampled.

> list all observations your project ever encounter

Author: done in bce35bd9d55aee34e34d7583104642652b2c0333

and are the authoritative source for all research data
such as ID values, sampling and treatment statuses, and so on.
\textbf{Data flow charts}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Flow\_Chart}}
list all datasets that are needed to create each analysis dataset,
and how they should be created by merging, appending,
or in any other way linking different datasets.

\subsection{Creating a data plan}

The data plan is the best tool a research team has for
the lead researchers to communicate their vision for the data work, 
and for the research assistants to communicate their understanding of that vision.
While the time to create the data plan is before any data has been acquired,
it should be a piece of documentation that is 
continuously updated as the project evolves.

To create a data plan according to DIME's template, first,
start by creating a \textbf{data linkage table} by listing 
all the datasets you know you will use in a spreadsheet.
If one source of data will result in two different datasets, 
then list each dataset on its own row.
For each dataset, list the \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}},

> and the name of the project ID variable for that unit of observation.

Author: I will add a side note with a definition

> Your project should only have one project ID variable per unit of observation. 

Author: I think we should leave that to chapter 5 as it is already a lot to digest here. But not super-string feelings about that

When you list a dataset in the data linkage table --
which should be done before that dataset is acquired --
you should always make sure that the dataset will
be fully and uniquely identified by the project ID, 
or make a plan for how 
the new dataset will be linked to the project ID.
It is very labor intensive to work with a dataset that
do not have an unambiguous way to link to the project ID, 
and it is a major source of error.

> The data linkage table should indicate whether 
> datasets should be merge one-to-one, for example, 
> merging baseline data and endline data that use the same unit of observation,
> or whether two datasets should be merged many-to-one, 
> for example, school administrative data merged with student data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data linkage table should indicate whether 
datasets can be merged one-to-one (for example, 
merging baseline and endline datasets that use the same unit of observation),
or whether two datasets need to be merged many-to-one
(for example, school administrative data merged with student data).
```

> Your data map must indicate which ID variables 

Reviewer: i think we need a clear definition, earlier on in this chapter, of project ID specifically and ID variables generally.

Author: done in dd5fb8ae2207f5cd9d9a8baa43a634ae2edd985a and 9182ca3a07adf589000e2231349fb7c379dfb6fe

can be used -- and how -- when merging datasets.

> The data linkage table is also a great place to list other types of metadata,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data linkage table is also a great place to list other metadata,
```

> such as the source of your data, its backup locations, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as the source of your data, its backup locations, the nature of the data license, and so on.
```

> Second, you should then create one \textbf{master dataset} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second step in creating a Data Plan is to create one \textbf{master dataset} 
```

for each unit of observation

> used in any significant research activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that will be used in any significant research activity.
```

Examples of such activities are data collection, data analysis, 
sampling, and treatment assignment.
The master dataset should include and be the authoritative source of
all \textbf{research variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Research variables:} Research data that identifies observations
	and maps research design information to those observations.
	Research variables are time-invariant and 
	often, but not always, controlled by the research team.
	Examples include
	ID variables, sampling status, treatment status, and treatment uptake.} 
but not include any \textbf{measurement variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Measurement variables:} Data that 
	corresponds to direct observations of the real world, 
	recorded sentiments of the subjects of the research 
	or any other aspect your project is studying. 

> 	Research variables are not controlled by the research team

Reviewer: shouldn't this say measurement variables?

Author: ```suggestion
	Measurement variables are not controlled by the research team
```

	and often vary over time.
	Examples include characteristics of the research subject, 
	outcome variables, input variables among many others.}.
Research variables and measurement variables 
often come from the same source,
but should not be stored in the same way.

> For example, if you are shared administrative data that both includes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you acquire administrative data that both includes 
```

information on eligibility to be included in the study (research variable) 
and information on outcome on the topic of your study (measurement variable) 
you should first decide which variables are research variables, 
remove them during the data cleaning (see Chapter 6) 
and instead store them in your master dataset. 
It is common that you will have to update 

> your master datasets throughout your project.

Reviewer 2: This example makes sense to me, but we should discuss how to phrase it. Perhaps we can just indicate that they should be separated during data cleaning without attempting to describe a step-by-step process, and then do that in ch 6?

Author: research variables in master dataset, measurement variables cleaned dataset

Author: done in b6f584c8998d0e1052aa1d5ab137a10a2e2122cc

The most important function of the master dataset 
is to be the authoritative source for the project ID.
This means that all observations listed 
should be uniquely and fully identified by the included project ID variable.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}}

> You should also list all other identifiers used in your project, 

Reviewer: insert sentence: The same project ID variable should directly link to all other project datasets.

Author: done in dd5fb8ae2207f5cd9d9a8baa43a634ae2edd985a

such as names, addresses, or other IDs used by partner organizations,

> and the master datasets can then serve as 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the master datasets will then serve as 
```

the linkage between those identifiers and the project ID.
Because of this, master datasets must, 
with very few exceptions, always be encrypted.
Even when a partner organization has a unique identifier, 
you should always create a project ID specific to your project only, 
as you are otherwise not in control over 

> who can re-identify your de-identified dataset. 

Reviewer: Suggest moving this into an earlier definition of project ID

Author: done in dd5fb8ae2207f5cd9d9a8baa43a634ae2edd985a

> You should include all observations ever encountered 

Reviewer: this line is repeated. if keeping in both places, suggest the same change i suggested earlier, to instead phrase this as 'you should include all observations in the sampling frame

Author: See my comment above why I disagree with `sampling frame`, but I agree we need to explain this better

Author: done in bce35bd9d55aee34e34d7583104642652b2c0333

in your master datasets,
even if they are not eligible for your study.
This is because, if you ever need to perform a record linkage such as a fuzzy match
on string variables like proper names, 
you will make fewer errors the more information you have.
If you ever need to do a fuzzy match,
you should always do that between the master dataset
and the dataset without an unambiguous identifier.
You should not do anything with that dataset until
you have successfully merged

> the project IDs from the master dataset.

Reviewer: Suggest to rephrase this to, 'The first step in working with any dataset is to ensure that it successfully merges with the project ID in the master dataset.' (and probably mention that we discuss this in more detail in chapter 5).

Reviewer 2: @luizaandrade to move content on fuzzy match from ch5 to this chapter

Reviewer 2: This is now in #497

> With the master datasets as an authoritative source 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the master datasets is the authoritative source 
```

of the project ID and all research variables,
it serves as an unambiguous method of mapping

> the observations in your study to your research design.

Reviewer 2: This one-sentence paragraph is a bit weird. can we merge it to the previous one?

> The third and final component of the data plan is the \textbf{data flow charts}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third and final step in creating the data plan is to create \textbf{data flow charts}.
```

Each analysis dataset
(see Chapter 6 for discussion on why you likely need multiple analysis datasets)

> should have a data flow chart that is a diagram 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should have a data flow chart showing how it was created. The flow chart is a diagram 
```

> where each starting point is either a master dataset 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starting from either a master dataset 
```

Author: This kind of loses the point that the flow chart can (an almost always do) have multiple starting points

or a dataset listed in the data linkage table.
The data flow chart should include instructions on how 

> all datasets should be combined to create the analysis dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the datasets can be combined to create the analysis dataset.
```

> The operations used to combine the data could, for example, be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operations used to combine the data could include:
```

appending, one-to-one merging, 
many-to-one or one-to-many merging, collapsing, or a broad variety of others.
You must list which ID variable or set of ID variables

> should be used in these operations,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should be used in each operation,
```

> and if the operation creates a new variable or combination of variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and note whether the operation creates a new variable or combination of variables
```

> that identifies the newly linked data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to identify the newly linked data.
```

Once you have acquired the datasets listed in the flow chart, 

> you can also start listing the number of observations that both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can add to the data flow charts the number of observations that both
```

> the starting point dataset should start with and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the starting point dataset has
```

> the combined datasets should have after each operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the number of observation each resulting datasets should have after each operation. 
```

This is a great method to track attrition and to make sure that
the operations used to combine datasets did not create unwanted duplicates
or incorrectly drop any observations.

> A data flow chart can be created in a flow chart drawing tool
> (there are many free alternatives online),
> by using shapes in Microsoft PowerPoint,
> or simply by drawing on a piece of paper and taking a photo.
> However, we recommend that the charts are created in a digital tool
> so that new versions can easily be created 
> once you learn new things about your research throughout your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A data flow chart can be created in a flow chart drawing tool
(there are many free alternatives online) or
by using shapes in Microsoft PowerPoint. 
You can also do this simply by drawing on a piece of paper and taking a photo,
but we recommend a digital tool
so that flow charts can easily be updated over time. 
```

Reviewer 2: This is just me having been brainwashed to write in a very particular format, but this super short paragraphs seem a bit weird to me.

\subsection{Defining research variables related to your research design}

After you have set up your data plan,
you need to carefully think about your research design 
and which research variables you will need in the data analysis
to infer the relation between differences in measurement variables 
and your research design.
We assume you have a working familiarity
with the research designs mentioned here.
If needed, you can reference \textcolor{red}{Appendix XYZ},
where you will find more details 
and specific references for common impact evaluation methods.

> The research designs discussed here compare a group that received

Reviewer: Suggest: As DIME primarily works on impact evaluations, we focus our discussion here on research designs that compare a group that received ... (continue the sentence as is)

Author: done 27dee583f8c60b28fee2d31d9275c6b7d82b02af

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\section{Translating research design to a data plan}

In most projects, more than one data source is needed to answer the research question.
These could be multiple survey rounds,
data acquired from different  partners (e.g. administrative data,
web scraping, implementation monitoring, etc)
or complex combinations of these.
However your study is structured, you need to know how to link data from all sources
and analyze the relationships between the units that appear in them
to answer all your research questions.
You might think that you are able to keep all the relevant details in your head,
but your whole research team is unlikely to have the same understanding,
at all times, of all the datasets required.
The only way to make sure that the full team shares the same understanding

> is to create a \textbf{data plan}\index{Data plan}.\sidenote{

Author: I have seen both, but my impression was that most was capitalized so I went with that. Easy fix in the end tho

> is to create a \textbf{data plan}\index{Data plan}.\sidenote{

Author: added to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/476

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Plan}}
DIME's data plan template has three components; 
one \textit{data linkage table},\index{Data linkage table}
one or several \textit{master datasets}\index{Master datasets}

> and one or several \textit{data flow charts}.\index{Data flowchart} 

Reviewer 3: flow chart one word or two?

Author: Agreed `flowchart` @kbjarkefur

Author: added to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/476

A \textbf{data linkage table}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Linkage\_Table}}
lists all the datasets that will be used in the project.
Its most important function is to indicate 
how all those datasets can be be linked when
combining information from multiple data sources.
\textbf{Master datasets}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
list all observations your project ever encounter

> are the authoritative source for all research data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and are the authoritative source for all research data
```

> such as ID values, sampling and treatment status, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
such as ID values, sampling and treatment statuses, and so on.
```
😬

\textbf{Data flow charts}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Data\_Flow\_Chart}}

> list all datasets that are needed to create each analysis dataset,

Reviewer 3: Some descriptor for the first use of "datasets" in this line? "Raw" or "original"?

Author: Later it is explained that each starting point is either a dataset listed in the data linkage table or a master dataset. so it is not just "raw" data sets. I would be ok with changing the text here to: "_list all data sources that are needed to create each analysis dataset,_"

Author: done in 173d1d6657ea8a3cd4e79c3a1bd1d55b915b7cbc

> and how they should be created by merging, appending 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and how they should be created by merging, appending,
```

> or in any other way link different datasets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or in any other way linking different datasets.
```

\subsection{Creating a data plan}

> The components of the data plan is the best tools a research team has for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data plan is the best tool a research team has for
```

the lead researchers to communicate their vision for the data work, 
and for the research assistants to communicate their understanding of that vision.
While the time to create the data plan is before any data has been acquired,

> it should be a dynamic documentation, 
> that you should keep up to date as the project evolves.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it should be a piece of documentation that is continuously updated as the project evolves.
```

Since we use "dynamic" for a specific technical use later

To create a data plan according to DIME's template, first,
start by creating a \textbf{data linkage table} by listing 

> all the datasets you know that you will use in a spreadsheet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
all the datasets you know you will use in a spreadsheet.
```

> If one source of data will results in two different dataset, 
> then list each dataset on a their own row.
> Then for each dataset list the \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{
> 	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}},
> and the name of the main ID variable for that unit of observation.
> Your project should only have one main ID variable per unit of observation,
> called the project ID. 
> When you list a dataset in the data linkage table --
> which should be done before that dataset is acquired --
> you should always make sure that the dataset will
> be fully identified by the project ID, 
> or make a plan for how 
> the new dataset will be linked to the project ID.
> It is very labor expensive to work with a dataset that
> do not have an unambiguous way to link to the project ID, 
> and it is a big source of error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If one source of data will result in two different datasets, 
then list each dataset on its own row.
For each dataset, list the \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}},
and the name of the main ID variable for that unit of observation.
Your project should only have one main ID variable per unit of observation,
called the project ID. 
When you list a dataset in the data linkage table --
which should be done before that dataset is acquired --
you should always make sure that the dataset will
be fully and uniquely identified by the project ID, 
or make a plan for how 
the new dataset will be linked to the project ID.
It is very labor intensive to work with a dataset that
do not have an unambiguous way to link to the project ID, 
and it is a major source of error.
```

What is "main ID"?

Author: I used main ID first, then went with Project ID to describe the main ID. but I removed all references to "main ID" now

> The data linkage table should indicate whether 
> datasets should be merge one-to-one, for example, 
> merging baseline data and endline data that use the same unit of observation,
> or whether two datasets should be merged many-to-one, 
> for example, school administrative data merged with student data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data linkage table should indicate whether 
datasets will merge one-to-one, 
such as merging survey data and census data for individuals,
or whether two datasets will merge many-to-one, 
such as school-level administrative data merged with student data.
```

First one is rather an append in most cases; reduced use of commas for clarity

Author: Can we use "may be merged"? Not all datasets that are possible to merge will be merge.

Your data map must indicate which ID variables 

> can be used and how when marging datasets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can be used -- and how -- when merging datasets.
```

> The data linkage table is also a great place to list other type of meta data,
> such as the source of your data, backup locations, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data linkage table is also a great place to list other types of metadata,
such as the source of your data, its backup locations, and so on.
```

Second, you should then create one \textbf{master dataset} 
for each unit of observation
used in any significant research activity.
Examples of such activities are data collection, data analysis, 

> sampling or treatment assignment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and sampling or treatment assignment.
```

The master dataset should include and be the authoritative source of
all \textbf{research variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Research variables:} Research data that identifies observations
	and maps research design information to those observations.
	Research variables are time-invariant and 
	often, but not always, controlled by the research team.
	Examples include

> 	ID variables, sampling status, treatment status, treatment uptake.} 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	ID variables, sampling status, treatment status, and treatment uptake.} 
```

but not include any \textbf{measurement variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Measurement variables:} Data that 
	corresponds to direct observations of the real world, 

> 	recorded sentiments of the subjects of the research 

Reviewer 3: "sentiments" is odd here. "Responses"?

Author: @mariaruth gave the feedback that my first definition of measurement variables sounded too much as if it was only observations of the real world. Assets, type of dwelling etc, And did not capture abstract things, like opinions etc. I agreed and tried to add something abstract. A "response" can be about something physical. Is there any other example of fully abstract things we are measuring?

Reviewer 2: how about "data the measures attributes or responses of research subjects"?

Reviewer: i like Luiza's suggestion

Author: Done in faa620cb5c4fee35dff4d01282961318a9bbd19a and 4ac1bd84aaf99f9b8d09c6004068ea136cc92f5a

	or any other aspect your project is studying. 
	Research variables are not controlled by the research team
	and often vary over time.
	Examples include characteristics of the research subject, 

> 	outcome variables, input variables among many others.}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	outcome variables, and control variables, among others.}.
```

General check here -- sidenotes inside or outside sentence punctuation, like this period? I've preferred after such punctuation.

Author: When there are two sidenotes in one sentence, then I do not know how to do it differently.

Author: I want to accept your suggestion, but your comment and my answer will disappear if I were to commit your suggestion

Author: done in 99df373f2f2ded7f10c4096891e1125854f5d4a5

Research variables and measurement variables 
often come from the same source,
but should not be stored in the same way.
For example, if you are shared administrative data that both includes 
information on eligibility to be included in the study (research variable) 

> and information on outcome on the topic of your study (measurement variable) 

Reviewer 3: something is wonky here, too many "on"s but I'm not sure what it should be

Author: What about: 
> For example, if you are shared administrative data that both includes 
data on eligibility to be included in the study (research variables) 
and data on the topic of your study (measurement variables)

Reviewer 3: eligibility for the study

Author: done in b6f584c8998d0e1052aa1d5ab137a10a2e2122cc

you should first decide which variables are research variables, 
remove them during the data cleaning (see Chapter 6) 
and instead store them in your master dataset. 
It is common that you will have to update 
your master datasets throughout your project.

The most important function of the master dataset 

> is to be the authoritative source of for the project ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is to be the authoritative source for the project ID.
```

This means that all observations listed 

> should have a uniquely and fully identified by the project ID.\sidenote{

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
should be uniquely and fully identified by the included project ID variable.\sidenote{
```

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}}
You should also list all other identifiers used in your project, 

> such as names, addresses and other IDs used by your partner organizations,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
such as names, addresses, or other IDs used by partner organizations,
```

> and the master datasets serves as 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and the master datasets can then serve as 
```

the linkage between those identifiers and the project ID.
Because of this, master datasets must, 
with very few exceptions, always be encrypted.

> Even when a partner organization have a unique identifier, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even when a partner organization has a unique identifier, 
```

you should always create a project ID specific to your project only, 
as you are otherwise not in control over 
who can re-identify your de-identified dataset. 

You should include all observations ever encountered 
in your master datasets,
even if they are not eligible for your study.

> Because if you ever need to do a fuzzy match,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is because, if you ever need to perform a record linkage such as a fuzzy match
```

on string variables like proper names, 

> you will do fewer errors the more information you have.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you will make fewer errors the more information you have.
```

If you ever need to do a fuzzy match,
you should always do that between the master dataset
and the dataset without an unambiguous identifier.
You should not do anything with that dataset until
you have successfully merged
the project IDs from the master dataset.

With the master datasets as an authoritative source 
of the project ID and all research variables,
it serves as an unambiguous method of mapping
the observations in your study to your research design.

The third and final component of the data plan is the \textbf{data flow charts}.

> All analysis datasets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each analysis dataset
```

(see Chapter 6 for discussion on why you likely need multiple analysis datasets)
should have a data flow chart that is a diagram 
where each starting point is either a master dataset 
or a dataset listed in the data linkage table.
The data flow chart should include instructions on how 
all datasets should be combined to create the analysis dataset.

> The operations used to combine the data could be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The operations used to combine the data could, for example, be
```

appending, one-to-one merging, 

> many-to-one/one-to-many merging or any other method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
many-to-one or one-to-many merging, collapsing, or a broad variety of others.
```

> You should also list which ID variable or set of ID variables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You must list which ID variable or set of ID variables
```

should be used in these operations,

> and if the operation results in a new variable or set of variable
> that identifies the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and if the operation creates a new variable or combination of variables
that identifies the newly linked data.
```

Once you have acquired the datasets listed in the flow chart, 
you can also start listing the number of observations that both
the starting point dataset should start with and
the combined datasets should have after each operation. 
This is a great method to track attrition and to make sure that
the operations used to combine datasets did not create unwanted duplicates

> or incorrectly dropped any observations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or incorrectly drop any observations.
```

A data flow chart can be created in a flow chart drawing tool
(there are many free alternatives online),
by using shapes in Microsoft PowerPoint,

> or simply by drawing on a piece of paper and take a photo.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or simply by drawing on a piece of paper and taking a photo.
```

However, we recommend that the charts are created in a digital tool
so that new versions can easily be created 
once you learn new things about your research throughout your project.

\subsection{Defining research variables related to your research design}

> After you have set up your data plan 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you have set up your data plan,
```

you need to carefully think about your research design 
and which research variables you will need in the data analysis

> to infer the relation between differences in measurements variables 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to infer the relation between differences in measurement variables 
```

and your research design.
We assume you have a working familiarity
with the research designs mentioned here.

> If needed, you can reference \textcolor{red}{Appendix XYZ},

Reviewer 3: Not sure the appendices are numbered. Good point.

where you will find more details 
and specific references for common impact evaluation methods.

The research designs discussed here compare a group that received
some kind of \textbf{treatment}\index{Treatment}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Treatment:} The general word for the evaluated intervention or event.

> 	This includes being offered training
> 	or cash transfer from a program, 
> 	experiencing a natural disaster etc.}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	This includes things like being offered a training,
	a cash transfer from a program, 
	or experiencing a natural disaster, among many others.}
```

The master dataset should include and be the authoritative source of
all \textbf{research variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Research variables:} Research data that identifies observations
	and maps research design information to those observations.
	Research variables are time-invariant and 
	often, but not always, controlled by the research team.
	Examples include
	ID variables, sampling status, treatment status, and treatment uptake.} 
but not include any \textbf{measurement variables}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Measurement variables:} Data that 
	corresponds to direct observations of the real world, 
	recorded sentiments of the subjects of the research 
	or any other aspect your project is studying. 
	Measurement variables are not controlled by the research team
	and often vary over time.
	Examples include characteristics of the research subject, 
	outcome variables, input variables among many others.}.
Research variables and measurement variables 
often come from the same source,
but should not be stored in the same way.
For example, if you acquire administrative data that both includes 
information on eligibility to be included in the study (research variable) 

> and information on outcome on the topic of your study (measurement variable) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and data on the topic of your study (measurement variable) 
```

	and often vary over time.
	Examples include characteristics of the research subject,
	outcome variables, and control variables among many others.}
Research variables and measurement variables
often come from the same source,
but should not be stored in the same way.
For example, if you acquire administrative data that both includes
information on eligibility for the study (research variable)
and data on the topic of your study (measurement variable)
you should first decide which variables are research variables,
and store them in the master dataset,
while storing the measurement variables in a cleaned dataset
as described in Chapter 5.
It is common that you will have to update
your master datasets throughout your project.

The most important function of the master dataset
is to be the authoritative source 
for how all observations are identified.
This means that the master datasets should include
identifying information such as names, contact information,
but also your \textbf{project ID}.\sidenote{
	\textbf{Project ID:} The main ID used in your project to identify
	observations. 
	You should never have multiple project IDs for the same unit of observation.

> 	The project ID must be uniquely and fully identified all observations in the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	The project ID must uniquely and fully identify all observations in the project.
```

	See \url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties} for more details.}

> The project ID should be the ID variable used in the data linkage table,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project ID is the ID variable used in the data linkage table,
```

and is therefore how observations are linked across datasets.

> Your master dataset may list alternative IDs used,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your master dataset may list alternative IDs that are used,
```

for example, by a partner organization.

> However, you should not use such an ID as your project ID,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you must not use such an ID as your project ID,
```

as you would then not be in control over 
who can re-identify data that you publish.
The project ID must be created by the project team, 
and the linkage to direct identifiers 
should only be known to people listed on the IRB.
If you receive a dataset with an alternative ID,
you should immediately replace it with your project ID,
and the alternative ID should be dropped 
as a part of your de-identification (see Chapters 5 and 7).
Your master dataset serves as the linkage between
all other identifying information and your project ID.
Since your master dataset is full of identifying information,

> it must always be stored encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it must always be encrypted.
```

> While the master dataset starting point often is a sampling frame 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The starting point for the master dataset is typically a sampling frame 
```

> (more on sampling frames later in this chapter),
> you should continuously update it with 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(more on sampling frames later in this chapter).
However, you should continuously update the master dataset with 
```

all observations ever encountered in your project,

> even if those observations are not eligible for your study.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even if those observations are not eligible for the study.
```

Examples include new observations listed during monitoring activities

> or observations that respondents in your study mention in,
> for example, a social network module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or observations that are connected to respondents in the study,
for example in a social network module.
```

> This is because, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful because, 
```

if you ever need to perform a record linkage such as a fuzzy match
on string variables like proper names,

> you will make fewer errors the more information you have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the more information you have the fewer errors you are likely to make
```

Its most important function is to indicate
how all those datasets can be be linked when
combining information from multiple data sources.
Each \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}

> list all observations relevant to the project

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
lists all observations relevant to the project
```

for a \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}}

> and are the authoritative source for all research data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and is the authoritative source for all research data
```

> such as unique identifiers, sample status and treatment assignment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
about that unit of observation
including unique identifiers, sample status, and treatment assignment.
```

all the data sources you know you will use in a spreadsheet.
If one source of data will result in two different datasets,
then list each dataset on its own row.

> For each dataset, list the , unit of observation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each dataset, list the unit of observation
```

The most important function of the master dataset
is to be the authoritative source 
for how all observations are identified.
This means that the master datasets should include
identifying information such as names, contact information,
but also your \textbf{project ID}.\sidenote{
	\textbf{Project ID:} The main ID used in your project to identify
	observations. 
	You should never have multiple project IDs for the same unit of observation.
	The project ID must be uniquely and fully identified all observations in the project.
	See \url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties} for more details.}
The project ID should be the ID variable used in the data linkage table,
and is therefore how observations are linked across datasets.
Your master dataset may list alternative IDs used,
for example, by a partner organization.
However, you should not use such an ID as your project ID,
as you would then not be in control over 
who can re-identify data that you publish.
The project ID must be created by the project team, 
and the linkage to direct identifiers 
should only be known to people listed on the IRB.
If you receive a dataset with an alternative ID,

> you should immediately replaced it with your project ID,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you should immediately replace it with your project ID,
```

as you are otherwise not in control over
who can re-identify your de-identified dataset.

While the master dataset starting point often is a sampling frame 
(more on sampling frames later in this chapter),
you should continuously update it with 
all observations ever encountered in your project,
even if those observations are not eligible for your study.

> Examples includes new observations listed during monitoring activities

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Examples include new observations listed during monitoring activities
```

Instead, the treatment group is compared to a control group
that is statistically indistinguishable,
which makes the average impact of the treatment
mathematically equivalent to 
the difference in averages between the groups.
Statistical similarity is often defined
as \textbf{balance} between two or more groups.	
Since balance tests are commonly run for impact evaluations,
DIME Analytics created a Stata command to 
standardize and automate the creation of nicely-formatted balance tables:
\texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}.

Each research design has a different method for
identifying the statistically-similar control group. 
The rest of this section covers how research data requirements 
differ between those different methods.
What does not differ, however, 

> is that these data requirements are all research variables.
> The source for the required research variables varies
> between research designs and between projects, 
> but the authoritative source for that type of data should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is that these data requirements are all research variables.
is that the research variables generated in the processes described below should always be included in the master dataset.
```

Author: I updated the suggestion to say "discussed below" instead of "generated below", as in this section we do not yet talk about how to generate them.

Author: done d305ab2c71522ecaa20290059ca31a5ea0bbfca2

Instead, the treatment group is compared to a control group
that is statistically indistinguishable,
which makes the average impact of the treatment
mathematically equivalent to 
the difference in averages between the groups.
Statistical similarity is often defined
as \textbf{balance} between two or more groups.	
Since balance tests are commonly run for impact evaluations,
DIME Analytics created a Stata command to 
standardize and automate the creation of nicely-formatted balance tables:
\texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}.

> Each research design has a different method	for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each research design has a different method for
```

to exploit events that occurred in the past.
Therefore, these methods often use either secondary data,
including administrative data or other classes of routinely-collected information,
and it is important that your data linkage table documents 
how this data can be linked to the rest of the data in your project.

> 

Reviewer 3: I suggest to cut a LOT of what follows here, up through time periods. I can review more closely but the specific designs is now, I think, too much for this chapter. @mariaruth @luizaandrade

Reviewer 3: Done in eea94d40c64696c1997d91673a9d49c41c1584a2 @kbjarkefur

\subsection{Time periods in data plans}

Your data plan should also take into consideration 
whether you are using data from one time period or several.
A study that observes data in only one time period is called
a \textbf{cross-sectional study}.
\index{cross-sectional data}
This type of data is relatively easy to collect and handle because
you do not need to track individuals across time,
and therefore requires no additional information in your data plan.
Instead, the challenge in a cross-sectional study is to
show that the control group is indeed a valid counterfactual to the treatment group.

Observations over multiple time periods, 
referred to as \textbf{longitudinal data}\index{longitudinal data},
can consist of either 
\textbf{repeated cross-sections}\index{repeated cross-sectional data}
or \textbf{panel data}\index{panel data}.
In repeated cross-sections,
each successive round of data collection uses a new random sample
of observations from the treatment and control groups,
but in a panel data study
the same observations are tracked and included each round.
If each round of data collection is a separate activity,

> then they should be treated as a separate source of data 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
then they should be treated as separate sources of data 
```

Furthermore, the field staff of your partner organization,
might not be aware that their actions are the implementation of your research.
Therefore, you must acquire monitoring data that 
tells you how well the treatment assignment in the field
corresponds to your intended treatment assignment,
for nearly all experimental research designs.

An example of a non-experimental research design
for which monitoring data also is important
are regression discontinuity (RD) designs
where he discontinuity is 
a cutoff for eligibility of the treatment. 
For example, 
let's say your project studies the impact of a program
for students that scored under 50\% at a test.
We might have the exact results of the tests for all students, 
and therefore know who should be offered the program, 
however that is not the same as knowing who attended the program. 
A teacher might offer the program to someone that scored 51\% at the test,
and someone that scored 49\% at the might decline to participate in the program.
We need to understand how common this was, 
and if one case was more common than the other.
Otherwise the result of our research will not be helpful

> in evaluating the program.

Reviewer 3: Suggest to cut

Author: cut what? the full RD example?

Author: oh, I see now what the lines are referring to. You are suggesting to cut the RD example. I'd be ok with that. But I wanted to make the point that monitoring data is not just for experimental data. @mariaruth gave that feedback on an earlier revision, and I agreed with that, and my solution was to include this example.

Reviewer 3: @bbdaniels to wrap in the above rewrite

Monitoring data is particularly prone to errors 
when linking it with the rest of the data in your project.
Often monitoring activities is done by 
sending a team to simply record the name of all people attending a training,

> or by a partner organization share their administrative data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or by a partner organization sharing their administrative data,
which is rarely maintained in the same format or structure as your research data.
```

In both those cases it can be difficult to make sure that
the project ID or any other unambiguous identifiers in our master datasets
is used to record who is who.

> Planning ahead for this, 
> already when the monitoring activity is added to the data linkage table,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Planning ahead for this when the monitoring activity is added to the data linkage table
```

is the best protection from ending up with poor correlation 
between treatment uptake and treatment assignment,
without a way to tell if the poor correlation is just

> a result of a fuzzy link between your monitor data and the rest of your data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a result of a fuzzy link between monitoring data and the rest of your data.
```
